The AI100 Report is an exhaustive investigation report in the field of Artificial Intelligence that educates and triggers critical thinking. Although it makes strong arguments on the negative influences AI has on society, it does not address the multiple challenges Recommender Systems pose. 

It is common information that data is the next big resource in the world. The data that is powered and generated by the people spending hours online is collected and processed. Every movement online is recorded. This data is shared with the recommender systems to provide tailored content every time a user uses his device. The more information the system is able to gather about an individual user, the more specific recommendations it is able to make. One of the major issues that arise due to this is that the privacy of personal information is lost. There are studies online that confirm that recommender systems pose a significant number of ethical issues. Some of them relate to breaches of user’s privacy, behavior manipulation and bias in the recommendations given to the user. Construction of data on the basis of what is taken to be a region’s generally accepted cultural norms, which acts as a filter for the recommendations.

These devices are also used by the larger demographic that includes people of all age groups. Content censorship is one major issue posed by Recommender Systems. One cannot control the ad recommendations that appear on social media applications and is not specifically child safe. A study conducted to observe the influence of digital media use on children and adolescents with ADHD during the COVID-19 pandemic revealed symptoms of inattention, oppositional defiant behavior and emotional problems.

Sources of information about specific subject areas can be inferred from one user and recommended to another with matching interests. Recommender systems shape an individual’s experience and social interactions. This may cause missing out on information that is truly important. Recommender Systems has a wider application in online commerce businesses, targeted content ensures the person spends more time online reducing productivity. This is called the Vegas effect. The economic success of these recommender systems are based on the amount of user data collected. Web searches deliver more effective results and generate ads based on the interests of the individual user.

The COVID-19 pandemic played a significant role in the contribution to increase in screen time and hence enabled people to share news as well as personal experiences and viewpoints with one another in real time. There was an increase in the spreading of fake news and alerts. There are studies that have identified various predictors of fake news such as (1) SMF (2) FoMO (3) inexperience using the internet (4) lack of information verification skills (5) laziness (6) information overload and (7) online trust. Also people are more likely to believe information when it aligns with their pre-existing views regardless if the information is reliable or not.

In conclusion, there are multiple studies that indicate that the recommender systems are powered by the user data and the autonomy of data of the user is reducing by the day. There needs to be a direction in which there is fairness of recommendation to different users and controlled mitigation of misinformation online.
